@ignore
@node Glossary
@chapter Glossary
@c This 'ignore' section fools texinfo-all-menus-update into creating
@c proper menus for this chapter.
@end ignore

@keyword{BNF}
In semantic 1.4, a BNF file represented ``Bovine Normal Form'', the
grammar file used for the 1.4 parser generator.  This was a play on
Backus-Naur Form which proved too confusing.

@keyword{bovinate}
A verb representing what happens when a bovine parser parsers a file.

@keyword{bovine lambda}

@keyword{bovine parser}
A parser using the bovine parser generator.  It is an LL parser
suitible for small simple languages.

@keyword{context}

@keyword{LALR}

@keyword{lexer}
A program which converts text into a stream of tokens by analyzing
them lexially.  Lexers will commonly create strings, symbols,
keywords and punctuation, and strip whitespace and comments.

@keyword{LL}

@keyword{nonterminal}

@keyword{overloadable}
Some functions are defined via @code{define-overload}.
These can be overloaded via ....

@keyword{parser}
A program that converts @b{tokens} to @b{tags}.

@keyword{tag}
A tag is a representation of some entity in a language file, such as a
functin, variable, or include statement.  In semantic, the word tag is
used the same way it is used for the etags or ctags tools.

@keyword{tokens}
The output of the lexer as well as the input to the parser.

@keyword{wisent parser}
A parser using the wisent parser generator.  It is a port of bison to
Emacs Lisp.  It is an LALR parser suitable for complex languages.
