@ignore
@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@c This 'ignore' section fools texinfo-all-menus-update into creating
@c proper menus for this chapter.
@end ignore

This chapter gives the overview of semantic and its goals.
Things to mention here could be:

@example
* regular expressions (and syntax tables) are the basis of identifying
  components of a buffer for purposes such as color highlighting
* regexp is useful but has limitations
* semantic provides new intrastructure that goes far beyond regexp
  based text analysis by
  - parsing each buffer based on the grammar of the language
  - define a uniform structure of the parse tree mostly independent of
    any one language
  - define an API so that programmers can develop applications based
    on that API so that work for all languages
  - provide bison-like parser generator so that new languages can be
    supported easily
  - provide a set of applications that demonstrate the usefulness
    of semantic.

The following diagram illustrates the benefits of using semantic:

* Semantic parses a language (for which a parser is available) and
  produces a common parse tree regardless of the original source
  language.

* Semantic provides a common API based on which applications can be
  written in a language independent way.  This means that the
  application will work for ALL languages for which a semantic parser
  can be witten.

* Semantic provids good set of tools and examples for the appplication
  writers.

* Semantic also provies extensive tools for the parser developers as well.
  For many languages, those that can be described using a context-free
  grammer, all that one needs to do is write a grammar file along with
  appropriate semantic rules.


The words in all-capital are those that semantic itself provides.
Others are current or future languages or applications that are not
distributed along with semantic.


                                                             Applications
                                                                 and
                                                              Utilities
                                                                -------
                                                               /       \
               +---------------+    +--------+    +--------+
         C --->| C      PARSER |--->|        |    |        |
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
               +---------------+    | COMMON |    | COMMON |<--- SPEEDBAR
      Java --->| JAVA   PARSER |--->|        |    |        |
               +---------------+    | PARSE  |    | PARSE  |<--- SENATOR
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
    Python --->| PYTHON PARSER |--->| TREE   |    | TREE   |<--- DOCUMENT
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
               +---------------+    | FORMAT |    | API    |<--- SEMANTICDB
    Scheme --->| SCHEME PARSER |--->|        |    |        |
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |<--- jdee
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
   Texinfo --->| TEXI.  PARSER |--->|        |    |        |<--- ecb
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |

                    ...                ...           ...         ...

               +---------------+    |        |    |        |<--- app. 1
   Lang. A --->| A      Parser |--->|        |    |        |
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |<--- app. 2
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
   Lang. B --->| B      Parser |--->|        |    |        |<--- app. 3
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |

                     ...        ...     ...          ...       ...

               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
   Lang. Y --->| Y      Parser |--->|        |    |        |<--- app. ?
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |
               +---------------+    |        |    |        |<--- app. ?
   Lang. Z --->| Z      Parser |--->|        |    |        |
               +---------------+    +--------+    +--------+
@end example

@ignore
This is from the Overview chapter of the original semantic.texi.

Semantic is a tool primarily for the Emacs-Lisp programmer.
However, it comes with ``applications'' that non-programmer might
find useful.
This chapter is mostly for the benefit of these non-programmers
as it gives brief descriptions of basic concepts such as
grammars, parsers, compiler-compilers, parse-tree, etc.

@cindex grammar
The grammar of a natural language defines rules by which valid phrases
and sentences can be composed using words, the fundamental units with
which all sentences are created.
@cindex context-free grammar
In a similar fashion, a ``context-free grammar'' defines the rules by which
programs can be composed using the fundamental units of the language,
i.e., numbers, symbols, punctuations, etc.
Context-free grammars are often specified in a well-known form called
@cindex Backus-Naur Form
@cindex BNF
Backus-Naur Form, BNF for short.
This is a systematic way of representing context-free grammars
such that programs can read files with grammars written in BNF
and generate code for ``parser'' of that language.
@cindex yacc
@cindex compiler-compiler
YACC (Yet Another Compiler Compiler) is one such program that has been
part of UNIX operating systems since the 1970's.
YACC is pronounced the same as ``yak'', the long-haired ox found in Asia.
The parser generated by YACC is usually a C program.
@cindex bison
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/bison/bison.html , Bison}
is also a ``compiler compiler'' that takes BNF grammars and produces
parsers in C language.
The difference between YACC and Bison is that Bison is
@cindex free software
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html , free software}
and upward-compatible with YACC.
It also comes with an excellent manual.

Semantic is similar in spirit to YACC and Bison.
@cindex bovinator
Semantic, however, is referred to as a @dfn{bovinator} rather than
as a parser, because it is a lesser cousin of YACC and Bison.
It is lesser in that it does not perform a full parse
like YACC or Bison.
@cindex bovination
Instead, it @dfn{bovinates}.
``Bovination'' refers to partial parsing which
@cindex parse tree
creates @dfn{parse trees} of only the top most
expressions rather than parsing every nested expression.
This is sufficient for the purposes for which semantic was designed.
Semantic is meant to be used within Emacs for providing
editor-related features such as code browsers and translators rather
than for compiling which requires far more complex and complete parsers.
Semantic is not designed to be able to create full parse trees.

@cindex parser
One key benefit of semantic is that it creates parse trees
@cindex bovine tree
(perhaps the term @dfn{bovine tree} may be more accurate)
with the same structure regardless of the type of language involved.
Higher level applications written to work with bovine trees
will then work with any language for which the grammar is available.
For example, a code browser written today that supports C, C++, and
Java may work without any change on other languages that do not even
exist yet.
All one has to do is to write the BNF specification for the new language.
The rest of the work is done by semantic.
For certain languages, it is hard if not impossible to specify the syntax
of the language in BNF form, e.g.,
@uref{http://www.texinfo.org ,texinfo}
and other document oriented languages.
Semantic provides a parser for texinfo nevertheless.
Instead of BNF grammar, texinfo files are ``parsed'' using
@ref{Regexps,regular-expressions,regular-expressions,emacs}.

Semantic comes with grammars for these languages:

@itemize @bullet
@item C
@item Emacs-Lisp
@item java
@item makefile
@item scheme
@end itemize

Several tools employing semantic that provide user observable features
are listed in @ref{Tools} section.

@end ignore

@menu
* Semantic Components::         
@end menu

@node Semantic Components
@section Semantic Components

This chapter gives an overview of major components
of semantic and how they interact with each other to perform its job.

The first step of parsing is to break up the input file into
its fundamental components.
This step is called lexing.
The output of the lexer is a list of tokens that make up the file.

@example
        syntax table, keywords list, and options
                         |
                         |
                         v
    input file  ---->  Lexer   ----> token stream
@end example

The next step is the parsing shown below.

@example
                    parser tables
                         |
                         v
    token stream --->  Parser  ----> parse tree
@end example

The end result, the parse tree, is created based on the parser tables,
which are in the internal representation of the language grammar used by
semantic.

Semantic database provides caching of the parse trees by saving them
into files named @file{semantic.cache} automatically then loading them
when appropriate instead of re-parsing.  The reason for this is to save the
time it takes to parse a file which could take several seconds or more
for large files.

Finally, semantic provides an API for the Emacs-Lisp programmer to access the
information in the parse tree.

