@ignore
@node Semantic User's Guide
@chapter Semantic User's Guide
@c This 'ignore' section fools texinfo-all-menus-update into creating
@c proper menus for this chapter.
@end ignore

This chapter describes how to use @b{applications} enabled by
semantic.
Many of these come with semantic, but others are distributed apart
from semantic.

@menu
* speedbar::                    How to use Semantic speedbar support
* ECB::                         Emacs Code Browser
* imenu::                       Special support for Imenu.
* senator::                     The Semantic Navigator
* analyzer::                    Analyze local context
* class browser::               Class hierarchy browser
* document::                    Document generation functions
* charts::                      Charting code statistics
* Minor Modes::                 Useful minor modes
* semanticdb::                  Cache your parsed buffers between sessions.
* Customizing::                 
@end menu

@node speedbar
@section speedbar
@cindex speedbar

Speedbar supports the display of tags through the Semantic parser.  To
use this utility, add a line like this to your @file{.emacs} file:

@example
(add-hook 'speedbar-load-hook (lambda () (require 'semantic-sb)))
@end example

or you can simply add:

@example
(require 'semantic-sb)
@end example

Once installed, speedbar will use semantic to find tags, and will
display them appropriately.  Tags from semantic will have additional
details which can be seen, such as return type, or arguments to
functions.

If you use @file{semantic-load.el}, you do not need to add the above
lines in your .emacs file.

Two additional speedbar modes are described in @ref{Speedbar Analysis}, and
@ref{class browser}.

@node ECB
@section ECB
@cindex ECB

From the ECB Website: @url{http://ecb.sourceforge.net}:

@example
ECB is a source code browser for Emacs. It is a global minor-mode
which displays a couple of windows that can be used to browse
directories, files and file-contents like methods and variables.
@end example


@node imenu
@section imenu
@cindex imenu

There is special support for creating Imenu entries using semantic.
This is a highly customizable tool which can create specialized menu
systems for navigating your source file.

By default, each language that wants special imenu support will set
itself up for it.  To setup imenu for your buffers, use this command
in your @file{.emacs} file:

@example
(add-hook 'semantic-init-hooks (lambda ()
                               	   (imenu-add-to-menubar "TAGS")))
@end example

Also supported is @dfn{which-func-mode}.  This usually uses imenu
tags to show the current function.  The semantic support for this
function uses overlays, which is much faster.

If you use @file{semantic-load.el}, you do not need to add the above
lines in your .emacs file.

You can customize imenu with the following options:

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-summary-function
Function to use when creating items in Imenu.
Some useful functions are found in @code{semantic-format-tag-functions}.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-bucketize-file
Non-@code{nil} if tags in a file are to be grouped into buckets.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-buckets-to-submenu
Non-@code{nil} if buckets of tags are to be turned into submenus.
This option is ignored if @code{semantic-imenu-bucketize-file} is nil.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-expand-type-members
Non-@code{nil} if types should have submenus with members in them.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-bucketize-type-members
Non-@code{nil} if members of a type should be grouped into buckets.
@code{nil} means to keep them in the same order.
Overriden to @code{nil} if @code{semantic-imenu-bucketize-file} is nil.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-sort-bucket-function
Function to use when sorting tags in the buckets of functions.
See @dfn{semantic-bucketize} and the @var{FILTER} argument for more details on this function.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-index-directory
Non @code{nil} to index the entire directory for tags.
Doesn't actually parse the entire directory, but displays tags for all files
currently listed in the current Semantic database.
This variable has no meaning if semanticdb is not active.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-imenu-auto-rebuild-directory-indexes
If non-@code{nil} automatically rebuild directory index imenus.
That is when a directory index imenu is updated, automatically rebuild
other buffer local ones based on the same semanticdb.
@end deffn

When adding support to a language, this variable may need to be set:

@defvar semantic-imenu-expandable-tag-class
Tags of this class will be given submenu with children.
By default, a @code{type} has interesting children.  In Texinfo, however,
a @code{section} has interesting children.
@end defvar

@node senator
@section senator
@cindex senator

Senator stands for SEmantic NAvigaTOR and was written by David Ponce.

This library defines commands and a minor mode to navigate and manage
semantic language tags in the current buffer.

@subsection Commands

The following user level commands are provided by Senator.

@subsubsection Navigation

@defun senator-next-tag
Navigate to the next Semantic tag.
Return the tag or @code{nil} if at end of buffer.
@end defun

@defun senator-previous-tag
Navigate to the previous Semantic tag.
Return the tag or @code{nil} if at beginning of buffer.
@end defun

@defun senator-jump
Jump to the semantic symbol @var{SYM}.

If optional @var{IN-CONTEXT} is non-@code{nil} jump in the local type's context
(see function @dfn{senator-current-type-context}).  If optional
@var{NO-DEFAULT} is non-@code{nil} do not provide a default value.

When called interactively you can combine the @var{IN-CONTEXT} and
@var{NO-DEFAULT} switches like this:

- \[universal-argument]       @var{IN-CONTEXT}.
- \[universal-argument] -     @var{NO-DEFAULT}.
- \[universal-argument] \[universal-argument]   @var{IN-CONTEXT} + @var{NO-DEFAULT}.
@end defun

@subsubsection Searching

Searching using senator mode restricts the search only to the
definition text, such as the name of the functions or variables in a
given buffer.

@deffn Command senator-isearch-toggle-semantic-mode
Toggle semantic searching on or off in isearch mode.
@kbd{C-c , i} toggle semantic searching.
@end deffn

@deffn Command senator-search-forward what &optional bound noerror count
@deffnx Command senator-search-backward what &optional bound noerror count
Search semantic tags forward or backward from point for string @var{WHAT}.
Set point to the end of the occurrence found, and return point.  See
@dfn{search-forward} for details and the meaning of @var{BOUND} @var{NOERROR} and
@var{COUNT}.  @var{COUNT} is just ignored in the current implementation.
@end deffn

@deffn Command re-search-forward regex
@deffnx Command re-search-backward regex
Search forward and backward for a token matching the regular expression
@var{regex}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command word-search-forward word
@deffnx word-search-backward word
Search forward and backward for a token whose name matches @var{word}.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Completion

Completion in senator scans all known definitions in the local file,
and uses that information to provide the completion.

@deffn Command senator-complete-symbol &optional cycle-once
Complete the current symbol under point.
If optional argument @var{CYCLE-ONCE} is non-@code{nil}, only cycle through the list
of completions once, doing nothing where there are no more matches.
@end deffn

@deffn Command senator-completion-menu-popup
Popup a completion menu for the symbol at point.
The popup menu displays all of the possible completions for the symbol
it was invoked on.  To automatically split large menus this function
use @dfn{imenu--mouse-menu} to handle the popup menu.
@end deffn

@subsubsection Copy/Paste

Token Copy/Paste is a high level form of the typical copy yank used by
Emacs.  Copying a tag saves the meta-information related to the
function or item the cursor is currently in.  When that information is
yanked into a new buffer, the form of the text created is based on the
current status of the programming buffer.

For example, pasting a function into a different file results in a
function call template to be inserted.  In a Texinfo file, a @@deffn
is created with documentation for that function or command.

@deffn Command senator-copy-tag
Take the current tag, and place it in the tag ring.
@end deffn

@deffn Command senator-kill-tag
Take the current tag, place it in the tag ring, and kill it.
Killing the tag removes the text for that tag, and places it into
the kill ring.  Retrieve that text with @kbd{C-y}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command senator-yank-tag
Yank a tag from the tag ring.
The form the tag takes is differnet depending on where it is being
yanked to.
@end deffn

@deffn Command senator-copy-tag-to-register register &optional kill-flag
Copy the current tag into @var{REGISTER}.
Optional argument @var{KILL-FLAG} will delete the text of the tag to the
kill ring.
@end deffn

For programmers, to provide specialized pasting, created an override
function for @code{insert-foreign-tag} (see @xref{Settings}.)

@subsubsection Minor Mode

@deffn Command senator-minor-mode
Toggle the SEmantic NAvigaTOR key bindings in the current buffer.

The following default key bindings are provided when semantic minor
mode is enabled:


@table @key
@item C-c , n
senator-next-token
@item C-c , p
senator-previous-token
@item C-c , i
senator-isearch-toggle-semantic-mode
@item C-c , j
senator-jump
@item C-c , TAB
senator-complete-symbol
@item C-c , SPC
senator-completion-menu-keyboard-popup
@item C-c , C-y
senator-yank-token
@item C-c , C-w
senator-kill-token
@item C-c , M-w
senator-copy-token
@item C-c ,
@end table
@end deffn

@subsection Customization

To enable the Senator keymap in all modes that support semantic parsing,
use this:

@example
(add-hook 'semantic-init-hooks 'senator-minor-mode)
@end example

To customize navigation around different types of tokens, use the
following variables:

@deffn Option senator-step-at-token-ids
List of token identifiers where to step.
Token identifier is symbol @code{'variable}, @code{'function}, @code{'type}, or other.  If
@code{nil} navigation steps at any token found.  This is a buffer local
variable.  It can be set in a mode hook to get a specific language
navigation.
@end deffn

@deffn Option senator-step-at-start-end-token-ids
List of token identifiers where to step at start and end.
Token identifier is symbol @code{'variable}, @code{'function}, @code{'type}, or other.  If
@code{nil} navigation only step at beginning of tokens.  If @code{t} step at start
and end of any token where it is allowed to step.  Also, stepping at
start and end of a token prevent stepping inside its children.  This
is a buffer local variable.  It can be set in a mode hook to get a
specific language navigation.
@end deffn

To have a mode specific customization, do something like this in a hook:

@example
(add-hook 'mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            (setq senator-step-at-token-ids '(function variable))
            (setq senator-step-at-start-end-token-ids '(function))
            ))
@end example

This will cause navigation and search commands to stop only between
functions and variables, and to step at start and end of functions
only.

@subsection Contact information for Senator

Any comments, suggestions, bug reports or upgrade requests are
welcome.  Please send them to David Ponce at david@@dponce.com

@node analyzer
@section analyzer
@cindex analyzer

The semantic analyzer is a library tool that performs context
analysis and can derive useful information.

@deffn Command semantic-analyze-current-context position
Analyze the current context at @var{POSITION}.
If called interactively, display interesting information about @var{POSITION}
in a separate buffer.
Returns an object based on symbol @dfn{semantic-analyze-context}.
@end deffn

While this can be used as a command, it is mostly useful that way
while debugging the analyzer, or tools using the return value.  Use
the Emacs command @dfn{describe-class} to learn more about using
@code{semantic-analyze-context}.

Another command that uses the analyzer context derives a completion
list.

@deffn Command semantic-analyze-possible-completions context
Return a list of semantic tokens which are possible completions.
@var{CONTEXT} is either a position (such as point), or a pre-calculated
context.  Passing in a context is useful if the caller also needs
to access parts of the analysis.

Completions run through the following filters:

@table @asis
@item Elements currently in scope
@item Constants currently in scope
@item Elements match the @code{:prefix} in the @var{CONTEXT}.
@item Type of the completion matches the type of the context.
@end table

Context type matching can identify the following:

@table @asis
@item No specific type
@item Assignment into a variable of some type.
@item Argument to a function with type constraints.
@end table

When called interactively, this function displays the list of
possible completions.  This is useful for debugging.
@end deffn

@menu
* Smart Completion::            
* Speedbar Analysis::           
@end menu

@node Smart Completion, Speedbar Analysis, analyzer, analyzer
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Smart Completion

The file @file{semantic-ia.el} contains two commands for performing
smart completion using the analysis library.  Analysis to calculate
these completions are done through the analyzer and completion
mechanism.  These functions just provide commands that can be bound
to key bindings.

@deffn Command semantic-ia-complete-symbol point
Complete the current symbol at @var{POINT}.
Completion options are calculated with
@dfn{semantic-analyze-possible-completions}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-ia-complete-symbol-menu point
Complete the current symbol via a menu based at @var{POINT}.
Completion options are calculated with
@dfn{semantic-analyze-possible-completions}.
@end deffn

@node Speedbar Analysis,  , Smart Completion, analyzer
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Speedbar Analysis

The Analyzer output can be used through a speedbar interface.
This interface lists details about the analysis, such as the current
function, local arguments and variables, details on the prefix (the
symbol the cursor is on), and a list of all possible completions.
Completions are specified in
@dfn{semantic-analyze-possible-completions}
@ref{analyzer}.

Each entry can be jumped to by clicking on the name.  For strongly
typed languages, this means you will jump to the definition of the
variable, slot, or type definition.

In addition each entry has an <i> button.  Clicking on this will
display a summary of everything that is known about the variable or
type displayed on that line.

If you click on the name of a variable in the ``Completions'' menu,
then the text that was recently analyzed will be replaced with the
name of the token that was clicked on in speedbar.

@deffn Command semantic-speedbar-analysis
Start Speedbar in semantic analysis mode.
The analyzer displays information about the current context, plus a smart
list of possible completions.
@end deffn

You can also enter speedbar analyzer mode by selecting ``Analyze''
from the ``Display'' menu item on speedbar's menu.

@node class browser
@section class browser
@cindex class browser

The semantic class browser is a library that can covert a project
group of files into an EIEIO based structure that contains links
between structures so that the inheritance links between semantic
tokens can be easily navigated.

The core to this library is one function in @file{semantic-cb.el}.

@defun semantic-cb-new-class-browser
Create an object representing this project's organization.
The object returned is of type @dfn{semantic-cb-project}, which contains
the slot `:types', a list of all top-level types.  Each element is a
class of type @dfn{semantic-cb-token}, or @dfn{semantic-cb-type}.
@end defun

Use the Emacs function `describe-class' to learn more about these
classes.

You can access the class inheritance structure through a speedbar
interface.  You can choose the ``Class Browser'' option from
Speedbar's ``Display'' menu item, or use the following command:

@deffn Command semantic-cb-speedbar-mode
Bring speedbar up, and put it into Class Browser mode.
This will use the Class Browser logic applied to the current Semantic
project database to build the available relations.  The structure of
the class hierarchy can then be navigated using traditional speedbar
interactions.
@end deffn

@node document
@section document
@cindex document

The document program uses semantic token streams to aid in the
creation of texinfo documentation.
For example, the following is a code fragment from @file{document.el}
that comes with semantic:

@lisp
(defun document (&optional resetfile)
  "Document the function or variable the cursor is in.
Optional argument RESETFILE is provided w/ universal argument.
When non-nil, query for a new documentation file."
  ...
  )
@end lisp

While visiting @file{document.el}, put the cursor somewhere within the
function shown above. Then type @kbd{M-x document}.
After asking for the texinfo file name, which in this case is
@file{semantic.texi}, this will update the texinfo
documentation of the @code{document} function in that file.
The result is that the following texinfo text will be either created
or updated in @file{semantic.texi} file:

@example
@@deffn Command document &optional resetfile
Document the function or variable the cursor is in.
Optional argument @@var@{RESETFILE@} is provided w/ universal argument.
When non-@@code@{nil@}, query for a new documentation file.
@@end deffn
@end example

Note that the function name, arguments and documentation string
is put in the right place.
Within the doc-string, the function arguments are marked with
the @@var command and the @code{nil} code fragment is marked with
@@code command.
This example provides just a glimpse of what is possible with the
syntactic information provided by semantic.

The main entry point for the
documentation generator are the following commands:

@deffn Command document &optional resetfile
Document the function or variable the cursor is in.
Optional argument @var{RESETFILE} is provided w/ universal argument.
When non-@code{nil}, query for a new documentation file.
@end deffn

@deffn Command document-inline
Document the current function with an inline comment.
@end deffn

@deffn Command document-insert-defun-comment nonterm buffer
Insert mode-comment documentation about @var{NONTERM} from @var{BUFFER}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command document-insert-new-file-header header
Insert a new header file into this buffer.  Add reference to @var{HEADER}.
Used by @code{prototype} if this file doesn't have an introductory comment.
@end deffn

In addition to these base documentation commands, the texinfo semantic
parser includes a two convenience functions when working directly with
texinfo files.

@deffn Command semantic-texi-update-doc &optional token
Update the documentation for @var{TOKEN}.
If the current buffer is a texinfo file, then find the source doc, and
update it.  If the current buffer is a source file, then get the
documentation for this item, find the existing doc in the associated
manual, and update that.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-texi-goto-source &optional token
Jump to the source for the definition in the texinfo file @var{TOKEN}.
If @var{TOKEN} is @code{nil}, it is derived from the deffn under @var{POINT}.
@end deffn

@node charts
@section charts
@cindex charts

Some commands to draw charts of statistics generated from parsing:

@deffn Command semantic-chart-nonterminals-by-token &optional buffer-or-stream
Create a bar chart representing the number of nonterminals for a token.
Each bar represents how many toplevel nonterminal in @var{BUFFER-OR-STREAM}
exist with a given token type.  See `semantic-symbol->name-assoc-list'
for tokens which will be charted.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-chart-database-size &optional buffer-or-stream
Create a bar chart representing the size of each file in semanticdb.
Each bar represents how many toplevel nonterminals in @var{BUFFER-OR-STREAM}
exist in each database entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-chart-nonterminal-complexity-token &optional symbol buffer-or-stream
Create a bar chart representing the complexity of some tokens.
Complexity is calculated for tokens with a token of @var{SYMBOL}.  Each bar
represents the complexity of some nonterminal in @var{BUFFER-OR-STREAM}.
Only the most complex items are charted.
@end deffn

@node Minor Modes
@section Minor Modes
@cindex Minor Modes

@deffn Command semantic-show-dirty-mode &optional arg
Minor mode for highlighting dirty tokens.
With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@deffn Command global-semantic-show-dirty-mode &optional arg
Toggle global use of @code{semantic-show-dirty-mode}.
If @var{ARG} is positive, enable, if it is negative, disable.
If @var{ARG} is @code{nil}, then toggle.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-dirty-token-face
Face used to show dirty tokens in @code{semantic-show-dirty-token-mode}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode &optional arg
Minor mode to highlight unmatched-syntax tokens.
With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@deffn Command global-semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode &optional arg
Toggle global use of @dfn{semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode}.
If @var{ARG} is positive, enable, if it is negative, disable.
If @var{ARG} is @code{nil}, then toggle.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-unmatched-syntax-face
Face used to show unmatched-syntax in.
The face is used in  @dfn{semantic-show-unmatched-syntax-mode}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command global-semantic-auto-parse-mode &optional arg
Toggle global use of @dfn{semantic-auto-parse-mode}.
If @var{ARG} is positive, enable, if it is negative, disable.
If @var{ARG} is @code{nil}, then toggle.
@end deffn

@deffn Command semantic-auto-parse-mode &optional arg
Minor mode to auto parse buffer following changes.
With prefix argument @var{ARG}, turn on if positive, otherwise off.  The
minor mode can be turned on only if semantic feature is available and
the current buffer was set up for parsing.  Return non-@code{nil} if the
minor mode is enabled.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-auto-parse-no-working-message
Non-@code{nil} disable display of working message during parse.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-auto-parse-idle-time
Time in seconds of idle time before auto-reparse.
This time should be short enough to ensure that auto-parse will be
run as soon as Emacs is idle.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semantic-auto-parse-max-buffer-size
Maximum size in bytes of buffers automatically re-parsed.
If this value is less than or equal to @var{0} buffers are automatically
re-parsed regardless of their size.
@end deffn

@node semanticdb
@section semanticdb
@cindex semanticdb

Semanticdb is a utility which tracks your parsed files, and saves the
parsed information to files.  When you reload your source files,
semanticdb automatically associates the file with the cached copy,
saving time by not re-parsing your buffer.

Semanticdb also provides an API for programs to use.  These functions
will return token information without loading the source file into
memory by checking the disk cache.

To use semanticdb, add the following to your @file{.emacs} file:

@example
(require 'semanticdb)
(global-semanticdb-minor-mode 1)
@end example

If you have a tool which optionally uses the semantic database, it may
be important to track if the database mode is turned on or off.

@deffn Option semanticdb-mode-hooks
Hooks run whenever @dfn{global-semanticdb-minor-mode} is run.
Use @dfn{semanticdb-minor-mode-p} to determine if the mode has been turned
on or off.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semanticdb-persistent-path
List of valid paths that semanticdb will cache tokens to.
When @dfn{global-semanticdb-minor-mode} is active, token lists will
be saved to disk when Emacs exits.  Not all directories will have
tokens that should be saved.
The value should be a list of valid paths.  @var{A} path can be a string,
indicating a directory in which to save a variable.  An element in the
list can also be a symbol.  Valid symbols are @code{never}, which will
disable any saving anywhere, @code{always}, which enables saving
everywhere, or @code{project}, which enables saving in any directory that
passes a list of predicates in @code{semantic-project-predicates}.
@end deffn

@deffn Option semanticdb-project-roots
List of directories, where each directory is the root of some project.
All subdirectories of a root project are considered a part of one project.
Values in this string can be overridden by project management programs
via the @code{semanticdb-project-root-functions} variable.
@end deffn

The important difference between these two is that you may put just
``~'' in @code{semanticdb-persistent-path}, but you may put individual
project directories into @code{semanticdb-project-roots} so that
different database lists don't get cross referenced incorrectly.

@subsection Searching

You can search for tokens in the database using the following
functions.  It is important to note that database search functions do
not return a plain list of tokens.  This is because some tokens may
not be loaded in a buffer, which means that the found token would not
have an overlay, and no way to determine where it came from.

As such, all search functions return a list of the form:

@example
   ( (DATABASE TOKEN1 TOKEN2 ...) (DATABASE2 TOKEN3 TOKEN4 ...) ...)
@end example

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function function &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all occurrences of nonterminals which match @var{FUNCTION}.
Search in all @var{DATABASES}.  If @var{DATABASES} is @code{nil}, search a range of
associated databases.
When @var{SEARCH-PARTS} is non-@code{nil} the search will include children of tokens.
When @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} is non-@code{nil}, the search will include dependency files.
When @var{DIFF-MODE} is non-@code{nil}, search databases which are of a different mode.
@var{A} Mode is the @code{major-mode} that file was in when it was last parsed.
When @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH} is non-@code{nil}, the make sure any found token's file is
in an Emacs buffer.
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-name name &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all occurrences of nonterminals with name @var{NAME} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES}, @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-name-regexp regex &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all occurrences of nonterminals with name matching @var{REGEX} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-type type &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all nonterminals with a type of @var{TYPE} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-property property value &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all nonterminals with a @var{PROPERTY} equal to @var{VALUE} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
Return a list ((@var{DB-TABLE} . @var{TOKEN-LIST}) ...).
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-extra-spec spec &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all nonterminals with a @var{SPEC} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
Return a list ((@var{DB-TABLE} . @var{TOKEN-LIST}) ...).
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-extra-spec-value spec value &optional databases search-parts search-includes diff-mode find-file-match
Find all nonterminals with a @var{SPEC} equal to @var{VALUE} in databases.
See @dfn{semanticdb-find-nonterminal-by-function} for details on @var{DATABASES},
@var{SEARCH-PARTS}, @var{SEARCH-INCLUDES} @var{DIFF-MODE}, and @var{FIND-@var{FILE}-MATCH}.
Return a list ((@var{DB-TABLE} . @var{TOKEN-LIST}) ...).
@end defun

@defun semanticdb-file-stream file
Return a list of tokens belonging to @var{FILE}.
If file has database tokens available in the database, return them.
If file does not have tokens available, then load the file, and create them.
@end defun

@node Customizing
@section Customizing
@cindex customizing

Customizations can be divided into two categories.
* M-x customize
* Low level hooks.

