\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c
@c $Id: srecode.texi,v 1.4 2008/01/29 14:26:27 zappo Exp $
@c
@c %**start of header
@setfilename srecode.info
@set TITLE SRecoder Manual
@set AUTHOR Eric M. Ludlam
@settitle @value{TITLE}
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* srecode: (srecode).       Template code generator
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@center @titlefont{srecode}
@vskip 0pt plus 1 fill
Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008 Eric M. Ludlam
@end titlepage


@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

SRecode is the Semantic Recoder.  Where semantic will parse source
files into lists of tags, the Semantic Recoder will aid in converting
semantic tags and various other information back into various types of
code.

The end goal is to provide templates that generate different types of
code for all the various languages, and also a sequence of hueristics
in the form of a minor-mode that aid the user in choosing the correct
template to insert.

@menu
* Quick Start::                 Basic Setup
* Parts of SRecode::		Parts of the system
* SRecode Minor Mode::		A minor mode for using templates
* Template Writing::		How to write a template
* Dictionaries::                How dictionaries work
* Getting Started::             How to use the system.
* Developing Template Functions:: How to write your own template insert functions.
* Index::
@end menu


@node Quick Start
@chapter Quick Start

When you intall CEDET, an @code{SRecoder} menu item should appear.

To toggle SRecode minor mode on and off use:

@example
M-x srecode-minor-mode RET
@end example

or add

@example
(srecode-minor-mode 1)
@end example

to force it on (which is the default) or pass in @code{-1} to force it
off.

Use the menu to insert templates into the current file.

You can add your own templates in @file{~/.srecode}, or update the
user template directory.

@defvar srecode-user-template-directory
@anchor{srecode-user-template-directory}
Directory where user templates are stored.
@end defvar

@node Parts of SRecode
@chapter Parts of SRecode

The Semantic Recoder system is made up of several layers.
There is a system that needs to be understood for adding template
support to new languages, and a system for using the templates in your
code.

See the Google template library to see the aspects of this template
libraries concepts.

@section Template Layer
The template layer provides a way to write, and compile templates.  The
template layer is the scheme used to insert text into an Emacs buffer.

The SRecode template layer is more advanced than other modes like the
Emacs packages @code{skeleton} or @code{tempo} in that it allows
multiple layers of templates to be created with the same names.  This
means that SRecode can provide a wide range of templates, and users
can override only the small sections they want, instead of either
accepting someone else's template, or writing large new templates of
their own.

Templates are written in @file{.srt} files.  You can learn how to
author new @file{.srt} files @ref{Template Writing}.

While the template system was designed for the ``Semantic Recoder'',
it can be used independantly for code generation or other purposes.

@section Template Manager
Once templates have been written, a scheme for loading and selecting
templates is needed.  The template manager has a loader for finding
template files, and determining which templates are relevant to the
current buffer.  Template files are sorted by priority, with user
templates being found first, and system level default templates last.

@section Dictionary
Dictionaries contain values associated with macro names.  A value can
be any lisp object, but the value of the macro should be directly
related to the type of macro created. 

@section Template Insertion
The template insertion layer invovles extensions to the basic template
layer.  A wide range of custom macros are available for mixing derived
data as macros into the plain text of a template.

In addition, templates can be declared with arguments.  These
arguments represent predetermined sets of dictionary values, such as
features of the current file name, user name, time, etc.

Some areguments are major-mode specific, such as the @code{:el} or @code{:cpp}
arguments.
@refill

@section Template Insertion Context
A context can be provided for templates in a file.  This helps
auto-selection of templates by name, or allows templates in different
contexts to have the same name.

A context can be automatically derived as well based on the parsing
state from @i{Semantic}.  @inforef{Top, Semantic Manual, semantic}.
@refill

@section Multiple Positioning system
Not written or implemented

The basic idea is a way to record multiple locations so that srecode
applications can inserted multiple related templates in multiple places.

@section Applications
Commands that do a particular task which involves writing code sits at
the top level.  These little applications have their own template
files and logic needed to fill in dictionaries or position a cursor.

@node SRecode Minor Mode
@chapter SRecode Minor Mode

The Semantic Recode minor mode enables a keymap and menu that provides
simple access to different templates or tamplate applications.

The key prefix is @key{C-c /}.

The most important key is bound to @code{srecode-insert} which is
@key{C-c / /}.  @ref{Getting Started}.

NOTE: At this time there isn't much in srecode-minor-mode.  The plan
is the following:

@table @key
@item C-c / <lower case letter>
Reserved for direct binding of simple templates to keys using a
keybinding command in the template file.
@item C-c / <upper case letter>
Reserved for template applications (Such as get/set inserter.)
@item C-c / <punctuation>
Srecode template management keys.
@end table


@node Template Writing
@chapter Template Writing
@anchor{@code{SRecode-template-mode}}

@code{SRecode-template-mode} is the major mode used for designing new
templates.  Srecode files (Extension @file{.srt}) are made up of
variable settings and template declarations.

@menu
* Variables:: Creating special and regular variables.
* Templates:: Creating templates
* Contexts::  Templates are grouped by context
* Prompts::   Setting prompts for interactive insert macros
@end menu

@node Variables
@section Variables

Variables can be set up and used in templates.  Many variables you may
use are set up via template arguments, but some may be preferences a
user can set up that are used in system templates.

A variable can be set like this:
@example
set VARNAME "some value"
@end example

@menu
* String Values::       Basic Variable values
* Compound Values::     Complex variable values
* Section Show::        Enabling the display of a named section.
* Special Variables::   Variables with special names
@end menu

@node String Values
@subsection String Values

Variables can be set to strings.  Strings may contain newlines or any
other characters.  Strings are interpreted by the Emacs Lisp reader so
@code{\n}, @code{\t}, and @code{\"} work.

When a string is inserted as part of a template, nothing withing the
string is interperted, such as template escape characters.

@node Compound Values
@subsection Compound Values

A variable can be set to a compound value.  A compound value is
usually used when you want to use dictionary entries as part of a
variable later on.

Compound variable values are set like string values except there are
more than one.  For example

@example
set NAME "this" "-mode"
@end example

These two strings will be concatenated together.

A more useful thing is to include dictionary macros and concatenate
those into the string.  For example:

@example
set NAME macro "MODE" "-mode"
@end example

will extract the value of the dictionary macro MODE and append
``-mode'' to the end.

@node Section Show
@subsection Section Show

To set a variable to show a template section, use the @code{show}
command.

@example
show NAME
@end example

This will enable that section.

@node Special Variables
@subsection Special Variables

Some variables have special meaning that changes attributes when
templates are compiled, including:

@table @code
@item escape-start
This is the character sequence that escapes from raw text to template
macro names.
@item escape-end
This is the character sequence that escapes the end of a template
macro name.
@item mode
This is the major mode, as a string with the Emacs Lisp symbol in it.
All templates in this file will be installed into the template table
for this major mode.

Multiple template files can use the same mode, and all those templates
will be mixed together.
@item priority
The priority of a file indicates where it lies in the template search
order.  System templates default to large priority numbers.  User
templates default to small priority numbers.  You can specify the
priority of your template to insert it anywhere in the template search
list.

If multiple files have the same priority, then then sort order is
unpredictable.  If no template names match, then it doesn't matter.
@item application
If a template file contains templates only needed for a particular
application, then specify an application.  Template files for an
application are stored in the template repository, but are not used in
the generic template insertion case.
@end table

If you want to insert the characters that belong to the variables
@code{escape_start} or @code{escape_end}, then place those into
a variable.  For example

@example
set escape_start "$"
set escape_end "$"
set DOLLAR "$"
@end example

@node Templates
@section Templates

A template represents a text pattern that can be inserted into
a buffer.

A basic template is declaired like this:
@example
template TEMPLATENAME :arg1 :arg2
"Optional documentation string"
----
The text to your template goes here.
----
binding "a"
@end example

Templates are stored in a template table by name, and are inserted by
the TEMPLATENAME provided.

The documentation string is optional.  This documentation string will
be used to aid users in selecting which template they want to use.

The code that makes up the raw template occurs between the lines that
contain the text ``----''.

@menu
* Template Section Dictionaries::  Template Scoped Macro values
* Template Macros::     Macros occuring in template patterns
@end menu

@node Template Section Dictionaries
@subsection Template Section Dictionaries

To add variable values to section dictionaries used withing a specific
template, you can add them to the beginning of the template
declaration like this:

@example
template TEMPLATENAME :arg1 :arg2
"Optional documentation string"
sectiondictionary "A"
set NAME "foo"
----
A beginning line @{@{NAME@}@}
@{@{#A@}@}Optional string @{@{NAME@}@} here@{@{/A@}@}
An end line
----
@end example

In this example, the @var{NAME} macro gets the value ``foo'', but only
while it is inside section A.  The outer scoped NAME will be empty.

This is particularly useful while using an include macro to pull in a
second template.  In this way, you can pass values known from one
template to a subordinate template where some value is not know.

From the Elisp default template file, a syntax table is just a
variable with a specialized value.

If a variable is declared like this:

@example
template variable :el
"Inert a variable.
DOC is optional."
----
(defvar $?NAME$ $^$
  "$DOC$")
----
@end example

then you can see that there is a NAME and DOC that is needed.
The @code{^} point inserter is also a handy key here.

The syntax table wants a variable, but knows the values of some of
these variables, and can recast the problem like this by using
template specific @code{sectiondictionary} macro declarations.

@example
template syntax-table
"Create a syntax table."
sectiondictionary "A"
set NAME macro "?MODESYM" "-mode-syntax-table"
set DOC "Syntax table used in " macro "?MODESYM" " buffers."
----
$<A:variable$
  (let ((table (make-syntax-table (standard-syntax-table))))
    (modify-syntax-entry ?\; ". 12"  table) ;; SEMI, Comment start ;;
    ;; ...
    table)
$/A$
----
@end example

In this way, @var{NAME} can be set as a user posed question for
@var{MODESYM} with ``-mode-syntax-table'' appended.  A simplified doc
string can also be posed.

Lastly, the A section contains more macro text which is inserted at
the @code{^} point marker.

By creating useful base macros for things like function or variable
declarations, and recycling them in higher-order macros, an end user
can override the basic declarator, and the higher order macros will
then obey the new format, or perhaps even work in more than one major
mode.

@node Template Macros
@subsection Template Macros

Template macros occur in the template text.  The default escape
characters are ``@{@{`` and ``@}@}'', though they can be changed
in the top-level variables.  See @ref{Variables}.

Thus, if you have the template code that looks like this:

@example
;; Author: @{@{AUTHOR@}@}
@end example

Then the text between @{@{ and @}@} are substituted by the value of the
macro AUTHOR.

Macros can be specialized to be more than just a text string.  For
example, the macro above could be augmented with an Emacs Lisp
function.

@example
;; Author: @{@{AUTHOR:upcase@}@}
@end example

In this case, the Emacs Lisp function ``upcase'' will be called on the
text value of the AUTHOR macro.

Macros can also be specialized to have different behaviors by using a
prefix, non-alpha character or symbol.  For example:

@example
@{@{! This is a comment inside macro escape characters @}@}
@end example

shows that the ``!'' symbol is for comments.

Alternately, a macro could query the user during insertion:

@example
(defun @{@{?NAME@}@} ()
   @{@{^@}@}
   ) ;; End of @{@{NAME@}@}
@end example

the ``?'' symbol indicates that if the symbol NAME isn't in the macro
dictionary, then the user should be queried for the NAME variable.
If NAME appears again in the macro, the original value specified by
the user will be inserted again.

In addition, the macro @{@{^@}@} indicates that after the template is
inserted, the cursor should be placed at that macro location.

Macros that are prefixed with the ``#'' symbol denote a section.  A
macro of the same name with a ``\\'' prefix denotes the end of that
section.

@example
@{@{#MOOSE@}@}
Here is some text describing moose.
@{@{/MOOSE@}@}
@end example

In this example if the section MOOSE was ``shown'' in the active
dictionary, then the text between the # and / macros will also be
inserted.

All the text and macros within a section are either not shown at all
(if that section is not 'visible') or the section is is show one time
for each dictionary added to that symbol.
@xref{Developing Template Functions}.
@refill

Macros prefixed with ``>'' will include another template.  Include
macros would look like this:

@example
@{@{>FOO:defun@}@}
@end example

where @code{FOO} is the dictionary variable for the sub-dictionary used for
expanding the template @code{defun}.  The @code{defun} template will
be looked up in the template repository for the current mode, or in
any inherited modes.

Another way to include another template is with the includewrap
insertion method, such as:

@example
@{@{>FOO:defun@}@}Handy Text goes here@{@{/FOO@}@}
@end example

In this case, @code{defun} is included just as above.  If the
@code{defun} template has a @{@{^@}@} macro in it, then the
section text ``Handy Text goes here'' will be inserted at that point,
and that location will not be saved as the cursor location.

@node Contexts
@section Context

Each template belongs to a context.  When promting for a template
by name, the name is prefixed by the current context.  If there is no
context, it defaults to @code{declaration}.

You can change context like this:

@example
context name
@end example

where @var{name} is some symbol that represents any context.

A context resides over all templates that come after it until the next
context statement.  Thus:

@example
context C1

template foo
"Foo template in C1"
----
----

context C2

temlate foo
"Foo template in C2"
----
----
@end example

creates two @code{foo} templates.  The first one is when in context
C1.  The second is available in context C2.

This is useful if there are multiple ways to declair something like a
function or variable that differ only by where it is in the syntax of
the lanugage.  The name @code{foo} is not ambiguous because each is in
a different context.

@node Prompts
@section Prompt

Some templates use promtping macro insertion.  A macro that needs a
prompt looks like this:

@example
$?NAME$
@end example

where ? comes after the first escape character.

by default, it will use a prompt like this when it is encountered:

@example
Specify NAME:
@end example

For such macros, you can pre-define prompts for any dictionary entry.
When that dictionary entry is first encountered, the user is prompted,
and subsequent occurances of that dictionary entry use the same value.

To get a different prompt, use a prompt command like this:

@example
prompt VARNAME "Nice Way to ask for VARNAME: "
@end example

Now, if you put this in a template:

@example
template variable
(defvar $?VARNAME$ nil
   "")
@end example

when VARNAME is encountered, it will use the nice prompt.

Prompts can be extended as well.  For example:

@example
prompt VARNAME "VARNAME: " default "srecode" read y-or-n-p
@end example

In this case, the @code{default} keyword indicates that
@code{"srecode"} is the default string to use, and @code{y-or-n-p} is
the function to use to ask the question.

For @code{y-or-n-p} if you type ``y'' it inserts the default string,
otherwise it inserts empty.

For any other symbol that occurs after the @code{read} token, it is
expected to take the same argument list as @code{read-string}.  As
such, you can create your own prompts that do completing reads on
deterministic values.

To have the default be calculated later from a dictionary entry, you
need to use the @code{defaultmacro} keyword instead.

@example
prompt VARNAME "Varname: " defaultmacro "PREFIX"
@end example

now, when it attempts to read in VARNAME, it will pre-populte the text
editing section with whatever the value of PREFIX is.

Some language arguments may supply possible prefixes for prompts.
Look for these when creating your prompts.

@node Dictionaries
@chapter Dictionaries

Dictionaries contain sets of macros.  The values associated with the
macro names could be anything, but how it is handled is dependent on
the type of macro being inserted.

@menu
* Create a Dictionary::	
* Setting Dictionary Values::	Basic dictionary values
* Compound Dictionary Values::	Complex dictionary values
* Argument Resolution::	        Automatic argument resolution
* Template Argument Dictionary Entries:: Catalog of arguments
@end menu

@node Create a Dictionary
@section Create a Dictionary

@defun srecode-create-dictionary &optional buffer
@anchor{srecode-create-dictionary}
Create a dictionary for @var{buffer}.
If @var{buffer} is not specified, use the current buffer.
The dictionary is initialized with no variables or enabled sections.
Any variables defined with @code{set} in the template, however,
becomes a name in the dictionary.
@end defun

@node Setting Dictionary Values
@section Setting Dictionary Values

When building an srecode based application, you will need to setup
your dictionary values yourself.  There are several utility functions
for this.

In the simplest form, you can assocate a string with a macro.

@defun srecode-dictionary-set-value dict name value
@anchor{srecode-dictionary-set-value}
In dictionary @var{dict}, set @var{name} to have @var{value}.
@end defun

For section macros, you can have alternate values.  A section can
either be toggled as visible, or it can act as a loop.

@defun srecode-dictionary-show-section dict name
@anchor{srecode-dictionary-show-section}
In dictionary @var{dict}, indicate that the section @var{name} should be exposed.
@end defun

@defun srecode-dictionary-add-section-dictionary dict name
@anchor{srecode-dictionary-add-section-dictionary}
In dictionary @var{dict}, add a section dictionary for section macro @var{name}.
Return the new dictionary.

You can add several dictionaries to the same section macro.
For each dictionary added to a macro, the block of codes in the
template will be repeated.
@end defun

@node Compound Dictionary Values
@section Compound Dictionary Values

If you want to associate a non-string value with a dictionary macro,
then you will need to use a compound value.  Compound dictionary
values are derived using EIEIO from a base class for handling
arbitrary data in a macro.

@deffn Type srecode-dictionary-compound-value
@anchor{srecode-dictionary-compound-value}
A compound dictionary value.
Values stored in a dictionary must be a @var{string}
or perhaps a dictionary for the case of sections.

Compound dictionary values derive from this class, and must
provide a sequence of method implementations to convert into
a string.
@end deffn

Your new subclass of the compound value needs to implement these
methods:

@defun srecode-compound-toString cp function dictionary
@anchor{srecode-compound-toString}
Convert the compound dictionary value @var{cp} to a string.
If @var{function} is non-@code{nil}, then @var{function} is somehow applied to an aspect
of the compound value.  The @var{function} could be a fraction
of some function symbol with a logical prefix excluded.
@end defun

This method is for dumping out tables during debugging.

@defun srecode-dump cp &optional indent
@anchor{srecode-dump}
Display information about this compound value.
@end defun


Here is an example of wrapping a semantic tag in a compound value:

@example
(defclass srecode-semantic-tag (srecode-dictionary-compound-value)
  ((prime :initarg :prime
	  :type semantic-tag
	  :documentation
	  "This is the primary insertion tag.")
   )
  "Wrap up a collection of semantic tag information.
This class will be used to derive dictionary values.")

(defmethod srecode-compound-toString((cp srecode-semantic-tag)
				     function
				     dictionary)
  "Convert the compound dictionary value CP to a string.
If FUNCTION is non-nil, then FUNCTION is somehow applied to an
aspect of the compound value."
  (if (not function)
      ;; Just format it in some handy dandy way.
      (semantic-format-tag-prototype (oref cp :prime))
    ;; Otherwise, apply the function to the tag itself.
    (funcall function (oref cp :prime))
    ))
@end example

@node Argument Resolution
@section Argument Resolution

Additional dictionary modifiers involve adding a set of predefined
macro values into the dictionary.

The create routines add a few.  Template specified arguments can also
add dictionary values.

@defun srecode-resolve-arguments temp dict
@anchor{srecode-resolve-arguments}
Resolve all the arguments needed by the template @var{temp}.
Apply anything learned to the dictionary @var{dict}.
@end defun

@node Template Argument Dictionary Entries
@section Template Argument Dictionary Entries 

When a dictionary is initialized for a template, then the dictionary
will be initialized with a predefined set of macro values.

A template of the form:

@example
template template-name :arg1 :arg2
----
Your template goes here
----
@end example

specifies two arguments :arg1, and :arg2.

The following built-in simple arguments are available:

@menu
* Base Arguments::
* Semantic Arguments::
* Language Arguments::
@end menu

@node Base Arguments
@subsection Base Arguments

@subsubsection Argument :user

@table @code
@item AUTHOR
Value of the Emacs function @code{user-full-name}
@item EMAIL
Current Emacs users email address.
@item LOGIN
Current Emacs users login name.
@item UID
Current Emacs users login name.
@item EMACSINITFILE
I'm not sure when this is handy, but it is this Emacs sessions' init file.
@end table

@subsubsection Argument :time

@table @code
@item YEAR
The current year.
@item MONTH
The current month name, unabbreviated.
@item DAY
The current day as a number.
@item DATE
The Locale supported date (%D).
@item TIME
The Locale supported time format (%X).
@end table

@subsubsection Argument :file

@table @code
@item FILENAME
The filename with out the directory part of the current buffer.
@item FILE
The filename with out the directory or extension
@item EXTENSION
The filename extension.
@item DIRECTORY
The directory in which the current buffer resides.
@item MODE
Major mode of this buffer.
@item SHORTMODE
Major mode of this buffer without ``-mode''.
Useful for inserting the Emacs mode specifier.
@item section RCS
Show the section RCS if there is a CVS or RCS directory here.
@end table

@subsubsection Argument :system

@table @code
@item SYSTEMCONF
The ``system-configuration''.
@item SYSTEMTYPE
The ``system-type''.
@item SYSTEMNAME
The ``system-name''.
@item MAILHOST
The name of the machine Emacs derived mail ``comes from''.
@end table

@subsubsection Argument :kill

@table @code
@item KILL
The top-most item from the kill ring.
@item KILL2
The second item in the kill ring.
@item KILL3
The third item in the kill ring.
@item KILL4
The fourth item in the kill ring.
@end table

@node Semantic Arguments
@subsection Semantic Arguments

@subsubsection Argument :tag

The :tag argument is filled in with information from Semantic.
The tag in question is queried from the senator tag ring.

@table @code
@item TAG
This is a compound value for the tag in the current senator kill ring,
or something handled via the variable
@code{srecode-semantic-selected-tag}.

@defvar srecode-semantic-selected-tag
@anchor{srecode-semantic-selected-tag}
The tag selected by a @code{:tag} template argument.
If this is @code{nil}, then @code{senator-tag-ring} is used.
@end defvar

Use the function part of a macro insert to extract obscure parts
of the tag.
@item NAME
The name of the tag as a string.
@item TYPE
The data type of the tag as a string.
@item ARGS
A Loop macro value.  Each argument is inserted in ARGS.  To create a
comma separated list of arguments, you might do this:

@example
@{@{#ARGS@}@}@{@{TYPE@}@} @{@{NAME@}@}@{@{#NOTLAST@}@},@{@{/NOTLAST@}@}@{@{/ARGS@}@}
@end example

Within the section dictionaries for each argument, you will find both
@var{NAME} and @var{TYPE}, in addition to the section values:

@table @code
@item FIRST, NOTFIRST
If ARG is the first item, or not.
@item LAST, NOTLAST
If ARG is the last item, or not.
@end table

@end table

@node Language Arguments
@subsection language Arguments

 - todo - fill in these sections

@subsubsection Argument :cpp


@subsubsection Argument :el


@subsubsection Argument :texi



@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

The user interface to the srecode template insertion system is very
basic right now.

@deffn Command global-srecode-minor-mode &optional arg
@anchor{global-srecode-minor-mode}
Toggle global use of srecode minor mode.
If @var{arg} is positive, enable, if it is negative, disable.
If @var{arg} is @code{nil}, then toggle.
@end deffn

@deffn Command srecode-insert template-name
@anchor{srecode-insert}
Inesrt the template @var{template-name} into the current buffer at point.
@end deffn

@menu
@end menu

@node Developing Template Functions
@chapter Developint Template Functions

You can develop your own custom template insertion functions.
Doing so is relatively simple, and requires that you write an Emacs
Lisp command.  

If the built in commands don't insert provide enough options, you will
need to write your own function in order to provide your dictionaries
with the values needed for custom templates.

In this way, you can build your own code generator for any language
based on a set of predefined macros whos values you need to derive
from Emacs Lisp code yourself.

For example:

@example
(defun my-srecode-insert (template-name)
  "Inesrt the template TEMPLATE-NAME into the current buffer at point."

  ;; Read in a template name.
  (interactive (list (srecode-read-template-name "Template Name: ")))
  (if (not srecode-table)
      (error "No template table found for mode %s" major-mode))
  (let ((temp (srecode-template-get-table srecode-table template-name))

       ;; Creawte a new dictionary
	(newdict (srecode-create-dictionary)))

    (if (not temp)
	(error "No Template named %s" template-name))

    ;; Add some values into the dictionary!
    (srecode-dictionary-set-value newdict "FOO" (my-get-value-of-foo))
    ;; Optionally show a section 
    (srecode-dictionary-show-section newdict "BLARG")
    
    ;; Add in several items over a loop
    (let ((my-stuff (get-my-stuff-list)))
       (while my-stuff
          (let ((subdict (srecode-dictionary-add-section-dictionary "LOOP")))
             (srecode-dictionary-set-value subdict "NAME" (nth 0 my-stuff))
             (srecode-dictionary-set-value subdict "ARG" (nth 1 my-stuff))
             (srecode-dictionary-set-value subdict "MOOSE" (nth 2 my-stuff))
             )
          (setq my-stuff (cdr my-stuff)))

    ;; Some templates have arguments that need to be resolved.
    (srecode-resolve-arguments temp newdict)

    ;; Do the expansion
    (srecode-insert-fcn temp newdict)
    ))
@end example

Lets look at the key functions involved above:

@section Interactive Completion:

@defun srecode-read-template-name prompt
@anchor{srecode-read-template-name}
Completing read for Semantic Recoder template names.
@var{prompt} is used to query for the name of the template desired.
@end defun

@section Template Insertion Commands

There are several ways to insert a template.  It is easiest to just
start with the main entry point.

@defun srecode-insert-fcn template dictionary &optional stream
@anchor{srecode-insert-fcn}
Insert @var{template} using @var{dictionary} into @var{stream}.
@end defun

@node Index
@chapter Index

@contents

@bye
